# Workshop Recap


by Daniel Choi, Rebecca Nesson, Braulio Carreno, and Brendan Kemp


On Friday and Saturday, August 17-18, the Boston Ruby Group ran a free
9-hour introductory Ruby and Rails workshop for women (and friends). 44
beginners attended the sessions at Harvard Law School in Cambridge,
MA—40 of them were women. A team of 17 experienced Ruby programmers
assisted them through software installation, lectures and exercises.
Students who had never written a line of code struggled for the first
time with the command line, git, HTTP protocol, irb, and heroku. By 5
o’clock on Saturday, all participants—students and assistants alike—were
tired from strain of sustained problem-solving. But every student left
the workshop with all the tools and concepts needed to write and deploy
Rails applications.

The inspiration for the workshop came on May 21, 2012, when Dan shared
with the Boston Ruby mailing list the “Diversity in Practice”
presentation video from PyCon 2012. In the video, Asheesh Laroia and
Jessica McKellar describe how Boston Python increased its portion of
women members from 1% to 15% with a year of outreach workshops and
project nights. We were floored. We had to do the same thing for the
Boston Ruby community.

As our first RailsBridge workshop, the event required a lot of prep
work: getting advice, sponsors, venue, and catering, putting up a
website, putting together the curriculum, promoting, and managing the
waitlist. Hundreds of emails were sent. There were challenges, setbacks,
and near-disasters. We had to learn how to navigate Harvard Law School’s
administration to reserve rooms, wireless access, and catering. One
important sponsor we were courting had us submit a proposal and then
after a week of consideration declined; another pulled out for financial
reasons. We almost failed to realize that the room we reserved for the
6.5-hour Saturday session lacked power outlets!

The most important task was recruiting a great teaching staff. Since one
of the goals of the workshop was to show that there were capable,
friendly women programmers in the Boston Ruby community, we felt that a
woman should be the head instructor, and that the teaching staff should
be predominantly female. We were worried that we wouldn’t meet this
goal. But as word spread that we were organizing a workshop, enough
women volunteers appeared to make up the majority of our teaching staff.
And they were awesome teachers too.

The 44 students we admitted into the workshop came from a variety of
backgrounds. Besides the expected software developers we had a
librarian, a landscape designer, an architect, a chemistry researcher, a
microbiologist, two MBAs, and several web and graphic designers.  A good
percentage of the attendees had some exposure to HTML/CSS and several
had experience in PHP, Java, C and Python.  Two of our students had
worked as developers for mainframe computers, writing PL/I and IBM
assembler.

Amazingly, everything came together smoothly and the workshop was a big
success. Based on conversations and our exit survey, the students found
it a well-organized, well-paced, accessible, social, fun, and very
friendly introduction to web application development with Ruby and
Rails.


Three things stand about in retrospect as key elements that made this
workshop successful.

Three things stand about in retrospect as key elements that made this workshop successful.

1. Vibe. The atmosphere of friendliness, camaraderie, and the “human
   touch” in general turned out just as important to have gotten right
   as the lesson plan. Our beginners felt comfortable, welcomed, and
   attended to. We think we managed to get the vibe right mainly because
   we recruited warm, friendly, and approachable volunteers. But it also
   helped a lot that we made it the goal of Friday night not just to get
   everyone through the installation tasks, but also to nudge people
   gently into socializing and lightening the mood. Before kicking off
   the Friday night installfest, we had all the teaching assistants and
   then the representatives of the sponsors—over twenty people in
   total—line up in front of the classroom and introduce themselves one
   by one. This humanized the whole event, and inevitably there were
   funny self-introductions that made the room erupt in laughter. The
   ice was broken in short order. Then came an unhurried installfest
   where teaching assistants and students had plenty of opportunities to
   interact and chat.

We also provided everyone three catered meals, free PragProg and
O’Reilly e-books, and free drinks and appetizers at the afterparty.

2. Pacing. By adding extra credit sections to the curriculum design and
   by having our teaching assistants scurry around constantly to help
   every student who got stuck, we managed to keep everyone on roughly
   the same page throughout the day and prevented quicker students from
   becoming bored and the slower ones from being overwhelmed.

3. Variety. We injected a bit of variety into the traditional
   RailsBridge curriculum with RailsBridge Boston’s own home-grown
   innovation: mini-lectures! [ NEED TO ELABORATE: REBECCA? ]

[ NEED lead into survey quotes here . ]

Diversity of the group - I have mostly worked in programmers-only
groups. I was delighted to see the background of not only the learners
but also the teachers. Not intimidating or over-whelming, very inspiring
and makes me fall in love with CS and programming all over again.

All the leaders & TAs were so nice and approachable.  I'm always
intimidated by these events and I felt very welcome.

The instructions and teaching assistants absolutely MADE this workshop.
I have done similar tasks using online tutorials.  But the volunteer
folks were so knowledgeable and so helpful; it really made all the
difference.

The friendly and welcoming vibe of the group members and their clear
love for Ruby.  I knew nothing coming in and loved that by the end I had
a working app and a basic clear grasp of how to get there. Love that the
sponsors are providing ebooks for us!  Assistants were very helpful.  

I liked the encouragement, enthusiasm and caring that was evident
throughout by the presenters and volunteers.  It's nice to know there is
a support system available to new Rubyists.

I loved the set-up of the class. The amount of material in each
mini-lecture was just enough, and I loved that we were actually allowed
to code a bit and learn from mistakes. The TAs I spoke with were all
excellent and seemed very eager to help. Great job guys :-)

The people were AWESOME. The instructors were incredibly nice and I met
some really, really cool people.

The workshop was run very efficiently. It provided an excellent mixture
of hands-on learning with lectures on the underlying concepts.

I think everything was presented in very digestible bites, and this
greatly facilitated learning.

Welcoming atmosphere, majority women in attendance. Meeting real
developers in the field.

I loved that there were so many teaching assistants and also that so
much care was taken to make sure nobody fell behind in the exercises.
The food was great as well!

I have to say also that the general atmosphere of friendly cooperation
was incredibly impressive.  It made me feel much more comfortable with
joining the community.  I think it will make a big difference in my
attending meetings, as well.  It's hard to just walk into a meeting of
people you don't know.

Kudos to the organizers and volunteers for a job well-done.

I really enjoyed it!  Thanks so much... I can tell a ton of hard work
went into it.

I really liked that we broke into smaller groups on Saturday and had a
TA working with us the whole time. As I was among a group of more
experienced users, I learned quite a few new things and shortcuts that I
can start using right away in my daily work.


[Can we insert a graphic of the overall satisfaction rating
distribution?]



It helped a lot that we had experienced advisors. Jessica McKellar and
Asheesh Laroia, stars of diversity outreach in the Python community,
offered constant encouragement, gave us our basic workshop template, and
served a our role models. Mary Jenn of RailsBridge San Francisco guided
us through the trove of RailsBridge workshop resources and other points
through emails and phone conversations.

It also helped a lot that we didn’t have to write a curriculum from
scratch. We took the well-vetted RailsBridge curriculum and focused on
adding of a few of our own twists to it. We embedded the RailsBridge
curriculum into our own custom Sinatra workshop application server,
updated the RailsBridge styling a bit with Twitter Bootstrap, and added
mini-lectures to the RailsBridge lesson plan.

[ SPONSORS SHOULD ALL BE MENTIONED HERE, AND ALSO TAs ]


[ Let’s use some of Rebecca Frankel’s pics too, especially ones with
people smiling ]



