
Exit Survey

https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0ArqbLasiA0FZdDY2dGU4aEhhdWUtaG5RZVNCdWlvaEE#gid=0

Rebecca's photos
  https://plus.google.com/u/0/photos/100614995427319264587/albums/5849065615400955041?gpinv=AMIXal_jAzyjZ2E53to7NyCoK4P91Tckt4-GB6N7cPUrLWGgQmx8iEoCDHBsvxVKLb-P9SUsOXlYci9mT-VtJ5mjenqAg15ExT1fhCVGT6auT_QN7dwliy4&cfem=1&authkey=CK3uy83H_PDn7QE


http://bost.ocks.org/mike/leaflet/

On February 22 and March 2, RailsBridge Boston held a workshop for women
and their friends at MIT. RailsBridge Boston workshops give a mostly female
audience a guided, friendly, and fun introduction to building web applications
with the Ruby programming language. 

This was RailsBridge Boston's fourth workshop since we started our efforts in
May of 2012. We were inspired to run these workshops when we saw a presentation
about the [outreach efforts](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QrITN6GZDu4) of the
Python Community to welcome more beginners and women into their ranks.  The
Boston Python effort was inspired in turn by the original
[RailsBridge](http://workshops.railsbridge.org/) diversity outreach effort to
bring more women into the Ruby comunity in San Francisco. 

We originally set out to run a large workshop on February 22nd and 23rd with
over 60 students and over 25 teaching assistants. We got through the Friday
night installfest on the 22nd. We were set to run through the main curriculum 
the next day. 

Early Saturday morning, on February 23, reports spread of a man with long rifle
roaming MIT campus. About 15 RailsBridge students and teaching assistants had
already showed up early for the workshop to start when MIT police advised
everyone on the main campus to stay indoors and locks their doors. Other
workshop volunteers got wind of the emergency by email and opted to stay home
to wait for events to pan out. 

* show some tweets from this incident; or web page news report screengrab

In the midst of uncertainty, we decided to cancel the Saturday workshop and
reschedule for the following weekend. Less than an hour after that MIT
announced the police had found no shooter and lifted the emergency. Later it
was revealed that the original tip was a hoax.

The shooter hoax cost us some money and attendance. We paid the cost of a
breakfast which had been laid out but was left unconsumed. About half our
original student pool also couldn't make the makeup Saturday workshop day
because of schedule conflicts.

But we forged ahead. On Saturday, March 2, 32 beginners, 27 of them women,
spent a little over 5 hours building and deploying their first Rails web
application. They were guided by 17 teaching assistants through exercises and
6 lectures on the whole range of skills involved in web application development,
from text editors and basic Ruby syntax to git source control, ActiveRecord
associations, and Heroku deployment.  

Our bad luck with shooter hoax was also more than made up for by our good luck
in having two bonus inspirational presentations by Diana Kimball and Jessica
McKellar.



BLANK attendees 


## Attendees

describe the backgrounds of attendees (initial group OK)

https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0Ar1UHvrwSrhudEN3ZmZncEFCRmpkTV9oQ3JBWWROeGc#gid=0


## TAs


merged with new TA applications for June 2013 workshop

https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0ArqbLasiA0FZdGdzbFUwb2NfY1pPenhGcGJ1MnBvdlE#gid=0



## Installfest

  The beginning of Friday night was extremely frustrating because the internet was so slow. I had to wait about an hour before I got a USB stick for installing Ruby (my download time was estimating 4 hours)- please bring plenty of these next time :)



## Lectures

  Lecture/activities were really good
  The first 2 lectures given by the two girls were really great and gave a good intro
  Maybe more understanding behind doing what we were doing when we followed the instructions and why/how to modify them



  I was incredibly impressed by all the talented individuals who were willing
  to give their time as lecturers and TAs. I think it was very valuable to have
  so many knowledgeable people willing to help out whenever I had a question. 


  Not that I can think of! I thought it was excellent to get a broad
  understanding of the use of Ruby during the lectures and to be able to
  implement a specific application during the workshop. The many helpful TAs
  were especially helpful.


  It would be useful to have a 10,000 feet overview of what exists out there
  other than rails, and what it is. For example is PHP or Apache a framework as
  well? I would also love to see examples of apps that run on rails, and a bit
  of what is necessary to deploy/migrate a site to our own domain.  o


  About 2/3 of the way through the day I found myself pretty lost. I could
  follow along the steps pretty well but couldn't conceptually wrap my head
  around what I was doing, even after talking with my TA. This might just be
  part of the process though, there's only so much you can learn in one day!

  The T.A.s were amazing!! They were so helpful and nice. They really know
  their stuff.


  I didn't really know what rails and ruby was before I joined the class. I was
  somehow under the impression we would be doing more html stuff. When we
  finally got around to changing the codes to link votes to a variable I got
  really confused because we were calling to methods instead of writing the
  methods. It just took me some time to figure it out but maybe make it more
  clear ruby is about calling premade methods to make life easier instead of
  starting from scratch.


  -- I think I would've gotten more out of the workshop with at least a pointer
  (highlighted "look at this and maybe bring a printout" link) to a page of
  basic vocabulary/syntax/punctuation information.

  I get the basic logic of programming, but I felt like I was skating over the
  top of a lot of information without having all the tools I wanted for really
  understanding it better. I could guess from reading the tutorial's directions
  what the commands would do, but I would've liked a bit more detail as to how
  to construct commands.  --

  I think the best part of the whole experience was when I successfully managed
  troubleshooting on my own. I think the best part of the *workshop* was having
  TAs to help when I was out of my depth.

  -- TAs are really great and friendly Steps are really easy to follow Food and
  facilities were great

  --

  Something more exciting to build More understanding behind why we do some of
  the things we do

  -- Everyone was very helpful and I will definitely be playing around with
  Ruby in my spare time!! :) Thanks everyone!!

  -- No group work ever really went on, people just worked by themselves and
  asked the occasional questions. I'm not sure if this is what you were going
  for or not with group work.

  -
  It didn't actually feel like small group work, more like individual work
  while in small groups, but I think that's better than actual group work with
  such different skillsets.

  Installfest was slow, and it didn't feel like there was really enough to do
  while we waited for downloads and installation. Maybe that would be a good
  time to either cover some of the background/structure or look at some of the
  vocabulary? (At least in an independent reading setup, perhaps.)


-

  I thought the mix of activities was effective. Also, I was glad that Friday was
  devoted to correctly installing the needed components. I think this made the
  workshop much more approachable, and it was nice to get help with the
  difficulties of installation. Thank you very much for putting together this
  excellent opportunity! I appreciate all the time it takes to execute such a
  workshop.



Since RailsBridge Boston started running its own workshops in August, we've
help inspire more women's workshop efforts in other cities through the 
writeups, photos, and survey results we've posted of our events..
(examples here)


